### XIII

The distinguishing features of film lie not only in the way in which man presents himself to the camera but in how, using the camera, he presents his surroundings to himself. A glance at performance psychology will illustrate the camera’s ability to test. A glance at psychoanalysis will illustrate a different aspect of that ability. Film has indeed enriched our perceptual world with methods that can be illustrated by those of Freudian theory. Fifty years ago, a conversational slip went more or less unnoticed. Its suddenly revealing depths in what had previously seemed a superficial discussion was probably regarded as an exception. Since *The Psychopathology of Everyday Life* [1901], that has changed. The book isolated and at the same time made susceptible of analysis things that had once swept past unnoticed in the broad stream of things perceived. Film has resulted in a similar deepening of apperception across the whole optical (and now also acoustic) segment of the sensory world. It is simply the reverse side of this state of affairs that performances presented in film can be analyzed more exactly and from many more angles than can performances expressed in paint or onstage. Compared with painting, it is the infinitely more detailed presentation of the situation that gives the performance portrayed on the screen its greater analysability. Compared with live theatre, the greater analysability of the performance portrayed cinematically is due to a higher degree of isolatability. That fact (and this is its chief significance) tends to foster the interpenetration of art and science. Indeed, in connection with a piece of behavior embedded in a specific situation and now (like a muscle from a cadaver) neatly dissected out, it can scarcely be said which is more gripping: its artistic worth or its scientific usefulness. *It will count among the revolutionary functions of film that it renders the artistic and scientific uses of photography, which beforehand generally diverged, recognizably identical*.[^17]

By choosing close-ups from stock, accentuating hidden details of props with which we are familiar, exploring commonplace environments under the inspired guidance of the lens, on the one hand film increases our understanding of the inevitabilities that govern our lives while ensuring, on the other hand, that we have a vast, undreamt-of amount of room for maneuver! Our pubs and city streets, our offices and furnished rooms, our factories and railway stations seemed desperately imprisoning. Then film came along and exploded all these dungeons with the dynamite of its tenths of a second, leaving us free, now, to undertake adventurous journeys amid their widely scattered ruins. The close-up expands space as the slow-motion sequence dilates movement. And just as enlargement is not really concerned with simply clarifying what we glimpse ‘anyway’ but rather brings out wholly new structural formations in matter, neither does the slow-motion technique simply bring out familiar movement motifs but reveals in them others that are quite unfamiliar and that ‘bear no resemblance to decelerations of rapid movements but are like strangely gliding, floating, supernatural ones’. Palpably, then, this is a different nature that addresses the camera than the one that speaks to the eye. Different above all in that the space permeated by human consciousness is replaced by one that is unconsciously permeated. While it is quite normal for a person to draw conclusions, even if only in outline, from the way others walk, that person will certainly know nothing of the walkers’ posture in the split second of their stepping out. And if we have a rough idea of how we pick up a cigarette lighter or a spoon, we know little of what actually happens between hand and metal when we do so, not to mention how this will vary according to our current mood. Here the camera intervenes with its different aids, its plunging and soaring, its interrupting and isolating, its stretching and condensing of the process, its close-ups and its distance shots. Only the camera can show us the optical unconscious, as it is only through psychoanalysis that we learn of the compulsive unconscious.

[^17]: If we are looking for an analogy with this situation, we shall find an instructive one in Renaissance painting. Here too we encounter an art whose unparalleled rise and importance rest not least on the fact that it includes within it a number of new sciences or at any rate fresh scientific data. It makes use of anatomy as well as perspective, mathematics, meteorology, and color theory. ‘What could be more remote for us,’ writes Valéry, ‘than the strange pretension of a Leonardo, for whom painting was a supreme goal and among the highest manifestations of wisdom – so much so, indeed, that in his convinced opinion it called for omniscience, and he himself did not shrink from a theoretical analysis before which men today stand in awe of its depth and detail.’

