### XIV

It has always been among art’s most important functions to generate a demand for whose full satisfaction the time has not yet come.[^18] The history of every art form has critical periods in which that form strives for effects that are able to find expression without effort only when technology has reached a new level – that is to say, in a new art form. The flamboyance, even crudeness, that art manifests in this way, especially in what are called ‘periods of decadence’, spring in fact from art’s richest core of historical forces. Latterly, Dadaism reveled in such barbarisms. Only now is what drove it becoming clear: *Dadaism was trying to generate the effects that people now look for in film, but using the tools of painting (sometimes literature)*.

Any radically new, pioneering generation of demands will go too far. Dadaism does so to the point of sacrificing the market values that film possesses in such abundance in favor of more significant intentions – of which it was not, of course, aware in the form we have been describing. The commercial marketability of their works of art meant far less to the Dadaists than their non-marketability as objects of contemplative immersion. They sought to achieve that non-marketability, that unrealizable quality, not least by fundamentally disparaging their material. Their poems are ‘word-salad’, containing obscene expressions and all manner of linguistic detritus. Likewise their paintings, onto which they glued buttons or bus tickets. What they achieve by such means is the ruthless destruction of the aura of their output, which they use the means of production to stamp as ‘reproduction’. It is impossible, in the presence of a picture by Arp or a poem by August Stramm, to take time out, as one can with a Derain painting or a Rilke poem, for contemplation and for forming a view. Immersion, which in the degeneration of the bourgeoisie became a school of asocial behavior, stands over against diversion as a variety of social behavior.[^19] Dadaist demonstrations did indeed constitute a very violent diversion in that they placed the work of art at the center of a scandal. That work had above all to meet *one* requirement: it must provoke public irritation.

In the hands of the Dadaists the work of art, from being a sight that seduced the eye or a sound that persuaded the ear, became a bullet. It flew towards the viewer, striking him down. It assumed a tactile quality. In so doing, it furthered the demand for film, the distracting element of which is also a mainly tactile element, being based on changes of setting and camera angle that stab the viewer with repeated thrusts. Compare, if you will, the screen on which the film unrolls to the canvas that carries the painting. The latter invites the viewer to contemplate; he is able, in front of it, to give himself up to his chain of associations. Watching a film, he cannot do this. Scarcely has he set eyes on it before it is already different. It cannot be pinned down. Duhamel, who hates film and understands none of its importance, though he does know something about its structure, comments on this state of affairs as follows: ‘I can no longer think what I wish to think. The moving images have ousted my thoughts.’ The chain of associations of the person viewing those images is indeed instantly interrupted by their changing. That is what film’s shock effect is based on, which like every shock effect seeks to be offset by heightened presence of mind.[^20] *By virtue of its technical structure film has taken the wraps off the physical shock effect that Dadaism kept shrouded, as it were, in the moral sphere*.[^21]

[^18]: ‘A work of art,’ said André Breton, ‘has value only in so far as it quivers with reflections of the future.’ It is indeed the case that every mature art form stands at the point where three lines of development intersect. The fact is, technology works in the first place towards a particular art form. Before film emerged, there were those little photobooks that, when rapidly thumbed before the eye, showed a boxing match or game of tennis; there were funfair machines where a sequence of images was engendered by turning a handle. Secondly, traditional art forms try hard at certain stages in their development to generate effects that are subsequently produced with casual ease by a new art form. Before film came into its own, the Dadaists sought to bring before their audiences a type of movement that someone like Chaplin then evoked naturally. Thirdly, often inconspicuous social changes work towards a change of reception from which only the new art form benefits. Before the cinema had begun to build up a specific clientele, in the ‘*Kaiserpanorama*’ images (already no longer still images) were viewed by an assembled audience. That audience sat around a large drum-shaped structure in which a number of stereoscopes were set: one for each viewer. Behind those stereoscopes images appeared automatically, lingered for a moment, and were then replaced by others. Similar methods had to be used by Edison when he showed the earliest filmstrips (before the screen and the projection process had been invented) to a small audience, which stared into the apparatus in which the sequence of images unwound. Incidentally, the invention of the *Kaiserpanorama* gave particularly clear expression to a dialectics of development. Shortly before film turned the viewing of images into a collective experience, in front of the stereoscopes of these rapidly obsolete establishments image-viewing by the individual once again acquired the same power as had formerly attached to the priest’s contemplation of the divine image in the *cella*.
[^19]: The theological prototype of this immersion is the awareness of being alone with one’s god. It was from this awareness that, in the great age of the bourgeoisie, freedom drew the strength to shake off the tutelage of the Church. In the age of its decline, the same awareness had to take account of the latent tendency for the forces to which the individual gives expression in his dealings with the deity to be withdrawn from the affairs of the community.
[^20]: Film is the art form that corresponds to the heightened state of mortal peril that modern man must face. The need to expose himself to shock effects is an adaptation by man to the risks that assail him. Film corresponds to deep-rooted changes in the apparatus of perception – changes that at the level of private life are felt by every pedestrian in city traffic, at the level of history by every citizen today.
[^21]: Much as for Dadaism, film also provides important insights as regards Cubism and Futurism. Both look like incomplete experiments on the part of art to take account of the way in which the camera has permeated reality. Unlike film, these schools performed their experiments not by exploiting the camera to portray reality artistically but almost by creating an alloy from portrayed reality plus portrayed camera. In Cubism, the chief role was played by a sort of premonition of the camera’s construction, based on optics; in Futurism by a premonition of the cinematographic effects brought out by the rapid movement of the filmstrip through the camera.

