### XV

The mass is a matrix from which currently all customary responses to works of art are springing newborn. Quantity has now become quality: *the very much greater masses of participants have produced a changed kind of participation*. The observer should not be put off by the fact that such participation initially appears in a disreputable form. There has been no shortage, in fact, of observers who have stuck passionately to precisely this superficial aspect of the matter. Of these, Duhamel has spoken most radically. What he blames film for mainly is the nature of the participation it arouses amongst the masses. He calls film ‘a pastime for helots, a distraction for uneducated, wretched, overworked creatures who are consumed by their worries, a spectacle that requires no concentration of any kind, that presupposes no ability to think, lights no flame in people’s hearts, and kindles no other sort of hope than the ludicrous one of becoming, at some time, a “star” in Los Angeles’. Clearly, this is at bottom the old charge that the masses are looking for distraction whereas art calls for immersion on the viewer’s part. It is a platitude. Which leaves only the question: does this furnish an angle from which to study film? Here we need to take a closer look. Distraction and immersion constitute opposites, enabling us to say this: The person who stands in contemplation before a work of art immerses himself in it; he enters that work – as legend tells us happened to a Chinese painter on once catching sight of his finished painting. The distracted mass, on the other hand, absorbs the work of art into itself. Buildings, most obviously. Architecture has always provided the prototype of a work of art that is received in a state of distraction and by the collective. The laws governing its reception have most to tell us.

Buildings have been with mankind since its earliest history. Many forms of art have come and gone. Tragedy emerges with the Greeks, then disappears with them, to be revived centuries later only in accordance with its ‘laws’. The epic, after originating in the youth of nations, wanes in Europe with the passing of the Renaissance. Panel painting is a creation of the Middle Ages; nothing guarantees that it will continue uninterrupted. But man’s need for shelter is perennial. The art of building has never lain fallow. Its history is longer than that of any other art, and imaginatively recalling its effect is important as regards any attempt to form a conclusion about how the masses relate to art. Buildings are received twofold: through how they are used and how they are perceived. Or to put it a better way: in a tactile fashion and in an optical fashion. No idea of such reception is conveyed by imagining it as taking place collectedly – as is the case among tourists, for example, ogling famous buildings. The fact is, there is not, on the tactile side, any counterpart to what on the optical side constitutes contemplation. Tactile reception does not occur both through the medium of attentiveness and at the same time through that of habit. As regards architecture, the latter largely determines even optical reception. The truth of the matter is that this also tends to occur very much less in a state of close attention than in one of casual observation. However, there are circumstances in which this reception accorded to architecture possesses canonical value. Because: *The tasks that at times of great historical upheaval the human perceptual apparatus is asked to perform are simply not solvable by visual means alone – that is to say, through contemplation. They are gradually mastered, on the instructions of tactile reception, by man’s getting used to them.*

Getting used to things is something even the distracted person can do. More: the ability to master certain tasks in a state of distraction is what proves that solving them has become a person’s habit. Through the sort of distraction that art has to offer, a surreptitious check is kept on how far fresh tasks of apperception have become solvable. Since, moreover, there is a temptation for individuals to duck such tasks, art will attack the most difficult and crucial of them where it is able to mobilize masses. It is currently doing so in film. *The kind of reception in a state of distraction that to an increasing extent is becoming apparent in all fields of art and is symptomatic of profound changes in apperception has its true practice instrument in film*. In its shock effect, film goes halfway toward meeting this form of reception. Film pushes back cult value not only by persuading the audience to adopt an appraising stance but also by ensuring that this appraising stance in the cinema does not include attentiveness. The audience is an examiner, but a distracted one.