### V

Works of art are received and appreciated with different points of emphasis, two of which stand out as being poles of each other. In one case the emphasis is on the work’s cultic value; in the other, on its display value.[^8],[^9] Artistic production begins with images that serve cultic purposes. With such images, presumably, their presence is more important than the fact that they are seen. The elk depicted by the Stone Age man on the walls of his cave is an instrument of magic. Yes, he shows it to his fellows, but it is chiefly targeted at spirits. Today this cultic value as such seems almost to insist that the work of art be kept concealed: certain god statues are accessible only to the priest in the *cella*, certain Madonna images remain veiled almost throughout the year, certain carvings on medieval cathedrals cannot be seen by the spectator at ground level. *As individual instances of artistic production become emancipated from the context of religious ritual, opportunities for displaying the products increase*. The ‘displayability’ of a portrait bust, which is capable of being dispatched hither and thither, exceeds that of a god statue, whose fixed place is inside the temple. The displayability of the panel painting is greater than that of the mosaic or fresco that preceded it. And if a setting of the mass is not inherently any less displayable than a symphony, nevertheless the symphony emerged at the point in time when it looked like becoming more so than the mass.

With the various methods of reproducing the work of art by technological means, this displayability increases so enormously that the quantitative shift between its two poles switches, as in primeval times, to become a qualitative change of nature. In primeval times, because of the absolute weight placed on its cultic value, the work of art became primarily an instrument of magic that was only subsequently, one might say, acknowledged to be a work of art. Today, in the same way, because of the absolute weight placed on its display value, the work of art is becoming an image with entirely new functions, of which the one we are aware of, namely the artistic function, stands out as one that may subsequently be deemed incidental.[^10] This much is certain, that currently photography and its issue, film, provide the most practical implementation of this discovery.

[^8]:This polarity is prevented from receiving due attention in the aesthetics of Idealism, which conceptually admits beauty only as something undivided (so excludes it as being divided). Nevertheless, in Hegel it makes its presence felt as clearly as can be imagined within the bounds of Idealism. ‘Images,’ we read in the *Lectures on the Philosophy of History*, ‘had been around for a long time: piety required them early on for its devotions, but the images did not need to be *beautiful* ones; indeed, piety found these actually disturbing. In the beautiful image there is also something external present, yet in so far as this is beautiful its spirit speaks to mankind; however, a key element in those devotions is the relationship to a *thing*, since they are themselves merely an unspiritual numbing of the mind $$ … $$. Beautiful art $$ … $$ arose in the Church itself $$ … $$ even though $$ … $$ art had already stepped outside the *principe* of the Church.’ A passage in the *Lectures on Aesthetics* also indicates that Hegel was aware of a problem here. As we read in these *Lectures*: ‘$$ … $$ We are beyond being able to venerate works of art as divine, offering them our worship; the impression they make is of a more considered kind, and what they arouse in us requires a higher touchstone.’
[^9]:The transition from the first type of artistic reception to the second determines the historical course of artistic reception generally. Nevertheless, a certain oscillation between the two poles of reception can in principle be demonstrated for each individual work of art. Take the Sistine *Madonna*, for instance. Since Hubert Grimme’s study we have known that the Sistine *Madonna* was originally painted for display purposes. Grimme was prompted to undertake his research by the question: what is the point of the wooden shelf in the foreground of the painting on which the two *putti* are leaning? How (Grimme went on to ask) did an artist like Raphael come to furnish heaven with a pair of portières? Investigation revealed that the Sistine *Madonna* had been commissioned on the occasion of the public lying-in-state of Pope Sixtus. Popes lay in state in a particular side chapel of St Peter’s. At the rear of this chapel, which was shaped like a niche, Raphael’s painting rested on the coffin during the lying-in-state ceremony. What Raphael shows in the painting is the Madonna emerging from the niche framed by the two green portière curtains and approaching the pope’s coffin, walking on clouds. At the memorial service for Sixtus, this outstanding display value of Raphael’s painting came into its own. Some time later the painting was mounted on the high altar of the abbey church of the Black Monks in Piacenza. The reason for this exile lies in Roman ritual. Roman ritual forbids images that have been used for lying-in-state ceremonies to be used for worship at the high altar. Raphael’s work was to some extent devalued by this provision. To get a proper price for it all the same, the Curia decided to include in the sale its tacit permission to use the painting on the high altar. And to avoid a row, it was arranged that the painting should go to a monastic brotherhood in a remote provincial town.
[^10]: Similar considerations, but at a different level, are raised by Brecht: ‘If the term “work of art” is no longer suitable for the thing that emerges when a work of art becomes a commodity, we must carefully and discreetly (yet without trepidation) drop the term if we do not wish simultaneously to abolish the function of that commodity, because this is a phase it must go through, and I mean that quite literally, this is no casual deviation from the correct path, what happens to it here is going to change it profoundly, eradicating its past to an extent that, were the old term to be resumed (and it will be, why not?), it will have ceased to evoke any reminder of what it once described.’

