## The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction

**Walter Benjamin**
Translated by J.A. Underwood

> "The establishment of the fine arts and their division into various categories go back to a time that differed radically from ours and to people whose power over things and circumstances was minute in comparison with our own. However, the astounding growth that our resources have undergone in terms of their precision and adaptability will in the near future confront us with very radical changes indeed in the ancient industry of the beautiful. In all arts there is a physical component that cannot continue to be considered and treated in the same way as before; no longer can it escape the effects of modern knowledge and modern practice. Neither matter nor space nor time is what, up until twenty years ago, it always was. We must be prepared for such profound changes to alter the entire technological aspect of the arts, influencing invention itself as a result, and eventually, it may be, contriving to alter the very concept of art in the most magical fashion."
>
> - Paul Valéry, *Pièces sur l’art*

### Foreword

When Marx undertook the analysis of the capitalist mode of production, this mode of production was in its infancy. Marx structured his investigations in such a way that they gained prognostic value. He went back to the fundamental relations of capitalist production and presented them in a manner that revealed what could be expected of capitalism in the future. It became clear that not only could an increasingly intensified exploitation of the proletariat be expected, but ultimately also the creation of conditions that would make its own abolition possible.
The transformation of the superstructure, which proceeds much more slowly than that of the base, has taken more than half a century to bring the changes in the conditions of production to bear on all cultural spheres. The form in which this has occurred can only be determined today. Certain prognostic demands must be placed on these determinations. However, these demands are less met by theses about the art of the proletariat after the seizure of power, let alone that of the classless society, than by theses about the developmental tendencies of art under the current conditions of production. The dialectic of these conditions is no less noticeable in the superstructure than in the economy. Therefore, it would be wrong to underestimate the polemical value of such theses. They set aside a number of traditional concepts—such as creativity and genius, eternal value and mystery—concepts whose uncontrolled (and currently difficult to control) application leads to the processing of factual material in a fascist sense. *The concepts newly introduced into art theory in the following differ from more familiar ones in that they are completely useless for the purposes of fascism. On the other hand, they are useful for formulating revolutionary demands in art policy.*
