### II

Even with the most perfect reproduction, *one thing* stands out: the here and now of the work of art – its unique existence in the place where it is at this moment. But it is on that unique existence and on nothing else that the history has been played out to which during the course of its being it has been subject. That includes not only the changes it has undergone in its physical structure over the course of time; it also includes the fluctuating conditions of ownership through which it may have passed.[^1] The trace of the former will be brought to light only by chemical or physical analyses that cannot be carried out on a reproduction; that of the latter forms the object of a tradition, pursuit of which has to begin from the location of the original.

The here and now of the original constitute the abstract idea of its genuineness. Analyses of a chemical nature carried out on the patina of a bronze may help to establish its genuineness; similarly, proof that a particular medieval manuscript stems from a fifteenth-century archive may help to establish its genuineness. *The whole province of genuineness is beyond technological (and of course not only technological) reproducibility*.[^2] But while in relation to manual reproduction (the product of which was usually branded a forgery of the original) the genuine article keeps its full authority, in relation to reproduction by technological means that is not the case. The reason is twofold. In the first place, a technological reproduction is more autonomous, relative to the original, than one made by hand. Through photography, for instance, it is able to bring out aspects of the original that can be accessed only by the lens (adjustable and selecting its viewpoint arbitrarily) and not by the human eye, or it is able to employ such techniques as enlargement or slow motion to capture images that are quite simply beyond natural optics. That is the first reason. Secondly, it can also place the copy of the original in situations beyond the reach of the original itself. Above all, it makes it possible for the original to come closer to the person taking it in, whether in the form of a photograph or in that of a gramophone record. A cathedral quits its site to find a welcome in the studio of an art lover; a choral work performed in a hall or in the open air can be heard in a room.

Even if the circumstances into which the product of technological reproduction of the work of art may be introduced in no way impair the continued existence of the work otherwise, its here and now will in any case be devalued. And if that by no means applies to the work of art alone but also, *mutatis mutandis*, to a landscape (for instance) that in a film slides past the viewer, as a result of that process a supremely sensitive core in the art object is affected that no natural object possesses in the same degree of vulnerability. That is its genuineness. The genuineness of a thing is the quintessence of everything about it since its creation that can be handed down, from its material duration to the historical witness that it bears. The latter (material duration and historical witness) being grounded in the former (the thing’s genuineness), what happens in the reproduction, where the former has been removed from human perception, is that the latter also starts to wobble. Nothing else, admittedly; however, what starts to wobble thus is the authority of the thing.[^3]

We can encapsulate what stands out here by using the term ‘aura’. We can say: what shrinks in an age where the work of art can be reproduced by technological means is its aura. The process is symptomatic; its significance points beyond the realm of art. *Reproductive technology, we might say in general terms, removes the thing reproduced from the realm of tradition. In making many copies of the reproduction, it substitutes for its unique incidence a multiplicity of incidences. And in allowing the reproduction to come closer to whatever situation the person apprehending it is in, it actualizes what is reproduced*. These two processes usher in a mighty upheaval of what is passed on – an upheaval of tradition that is the verso of the current crisis and renewal of mankind. They are intimately bound up with the mass movements of our day. Their most powerful agent is film. Even in its most positive form (indeed, precisely therein), the social significance of film is unthinkable without this destructive, this cathartic side: namely, liquidation of the value of tradition in the cultural heritage. This phenomenon is at its most tangible in major historical films. It is drawing more and more positions into its sphere. And when Abel Gance exclaimed excitedly in 1927: ‘Shakespeare, Rembrandt, Beethoven will make films [ … ] All legends, all mythologies and all myths, all founders of religions – all religions, indeed [ … ] await their filmed resurrection, and the heroes are pressing at the gates,’ he was calling (doubtless without meaning to) for a comprehensive liquidation.



[^1]: It goes without saying that the history of the work of art embraces more: that of the *Mona Lisa*, for instance, includes the nature and number of the copies made of it in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries.
[^2]:Precisely because genuineness is not reproducible, intensive intrusion by certain reproductive processes (technological ones) provided a handle for differentiating and grading genuineness. Cultivating such distinctions was an important function of the art trade. This had an obvious interest in maintaining a separation between different prints from a wood block (those prior to and those subsequent to printing), a copperplate, and the like. With the invention of wood engraving, the quality of genuineness was attacked at the root, so to speak, before it had produced its late flowering. ‘Genuine’ was something a medieval Madonna image was not at the time of its making – not yet; that was something it became over the course of ensuing centuries, most plentifully, perhaps, in the last [the nineteenth century].
[^3]:The crummiest provincial performance of *Faust* nevertheless has this over a *Faust* film: notionally, it stands in competition with the first Weimar performance. And what, in terms of traditional content, the audience may recall across the footlights becomes unusable in the cinema (e.g. the fact that the character of Mephisto contains elements of a friend of Goethe’s youth, Johann Heinrich Merck, and so on and so forth).