### VII

The clash fought out during the nineteenth century as painting and photography disputed the artistic merits of their respective products seems muddled and ill-conceived today. However, far from denying its importance, this may actually underline it. The fact is, that clash was the expression of a historical upheaval of which, as such, neither party was aware. The age where art became reproducible by technological means, in setting it free from its cultic roots, extinguished the light of its autonomy for ever. Yet the alteration in the function of art thus engendered dropped from the century’s field of view. And even the succeeding century, the twentieth, which saw the development of film, long remained oblivious to it.

*Much wisdom had already been thrown away on trying to decide whether photography was an art (without asking the prior question: whether, with the invention of photography, the very nature of art had undergone a change), but before long the theoreticians of film were asking a similarly hasty question*. However, the problems that photography had presented for traditional aesthetics were child’s play compared to what film had in store. Hence the blind violence that marked the beginnings of film criticism. Here is Abel Gance, for instance, likening film to hieroglyphics: ‘This has then brought us, in the wake of a most remarkable return to the past, back to the level of expression of the Egyptians. Pictography has not yet reached full maturity for the reason that our eyes are not yet up to it. There is not yet enough respect, not enough *cult* for what seeks expression through it.’ Or as Séverin-Mars writes: ‘What art was ever granted a dream that was more poetic and at the same time more real! Looked at from that standpoint, film would represent a form of expression entirely beyond compare, and only persons of the noblest way of thinking in the most sublime, most mysterious moments of their careers might be permitted to move within its atmosphere.’ As for Alexandre Arnoux, he roundly concludes a fantasy on silent film with the question: ‘All the bold descriptions we have made use of here – ought they not without exception to add up to how we define prayer?’ It is most instructive to see how the endeavor to annex film to ‘art’ requires such critics to throw caution to the winds in reading cultic elements into their subject. And yet, by the time these speculations appeared, such works as *A Woman of Paris* and *The Gold Rush* had already been made. That does not stop Abel Gance from invoking his comparison with hieroglyphics, and Séverin-Mars talks of film as one might discuss the paintings of Fra Angelico. What is characteristic is that, still today [i.e. 1936], particularly reactionary writers seek the meaning of film along the same lines, finding it not in the sacred, perhaps, but certainly in the supernatural. When Reinhardt made his [1935] film of *A Midsummer Night’s Dream*, Werfel observed that it was undoubtedly sterile imitation of the external world with its streets, interiors, railway stations, restaurants, cars, and beaches that had hitherto prevented film from soaring into the realms of art. ‘Film has not yet attained its real meaning or seized its true potential. These consist in its unique ability to give voice, using natural means in an incomparably persuasive manner, to the fairy-like, the miraculous, the supernatural.’