### Afterword

The increasing proletarianization of people today and the increasing formation of masses are two sides of one and the same sequence of events. Fascism seeks to organize the newly emergent proletarianized masses without touching the property relations that those masses are so urgently trying to abolish. Fascism sees its salvation in allowing the masses to find their voice (not, of course, to receive their due).[^22] The masses have a right to see the ownership structure changed: Fascism seeks to give them a *voice* in retaining that structure unaltered. *Fascism leads logically to an aestheticization of political life*. The violation of the masses, which in a leader cult it forces to their knees, corresponds to the violation exercised by a film camera, which Fascism enlists in the service of producing cultic values.

*All efforts to aestheticize politics culminate in one point. That one point is war*. War, and war only, makes it possible to give mass movements on a colossal scale a goal, while retaining the traditional ownership structure. That is how the situation looks from the political viewpoint. From the viewpoint of technology it looks like this: Only war makes it possible to mobilize all the technological resources of the present day while retaining the ownership structure. Obviously, the apotheosis of war by Fascism does not deploy *these* arguments. Nevertheless, a quick consideration of them will be instructive. In Marinetti’s *Manifesto Concerning the Ethiopian Colonial War* we read: ‘For twenty-seven years we Futurists have been objecting to the way war is described as anti-aesthetic. Accordingly, we state: War is beautiful because thanks to gas masks, terror-inducing megaphones, flame-throwers, and small tanks man’s dominion over the subject machine is proven. War is beautiful because it ushers in the dreamt-of metallization of the human body. War is beautiful because it enriches a meadow in bloom by adding the fiery orchids of machine-guns. War is beautiful because it combines rifle-fire, barrages of bullets, lulls in the firing, and the scents and smells of putrescence into a symphony. War is beautiful because it creates fresh architectures such as those of the large tank, geometrical flying formations, spirals of smoke rising from burning villages, and much else besides. Writers and artists of Futurism, remember these principles of an aesthetics of war in order that your struggles to find a new kind of poetry and a new kind of sculpture may be illuminated thereby!’

This manifesto has the advantage of clarity. The questions it poses deserve to be adopted by the dialectician. It sees the aesthetics of modern warfare as follows: if natural exploitation of the forces of production is held back by the ownership structure, the increase in technological substitutes, tempi and sources of power calls urgently for unnatural exploitation. This it finds in war, which with its destructions affords proof that society was not sufficiently mature to make technology its organ, that technology was not sufficiently developed to cope with society’s elemental forces. Imperialistic war is characterized in its ghastliest traits by the discrepancy between the hugely powerful means of production and their inadequate exploitation in the production process (in other words, by unemployment and lack of markets). *Imperialistic war is a rebellion on the part of a technology that is collecting in ‘human material’ the ambitions that society has robbed it of in terms of natural materials*. Rather than develop rivers into canals, it diverts the human stream to flow into the bed of its trenches; rather than scatter seeds from its aeroplanes, it drops incendiary bombs on cities; and in gas warfare it has found a new way of doing away with aura.

*‘Fiat ars – pereat mundus’*, says Fascism, looking (as Marinetti professes) to war for artistic satisfaction of the different kind of sensory perception brought about by technology. This is clearly the culmination of *‘l’art pour l’art’* [‘art for art’s sake’]. Humanity, which in Homer’s day provided a spectacle for the gods of Olympus, has now become one for itself. Its alienation from itself has reached a point where it now allows its own destruction to be savored as an aesthetic pleasure of the first order. *That is how things are, given the kind of aestheticization of politics that Fascism pursues. Communism’s reply is to politicize art*.



[^22]: Here, particularly with regard to the weekly newsreel, the propaganda significance of which can scarcely be exaggerated, one technological fact stands out. *Mass reproduction particularly suits reproduction of masses*. In big festival processions, monster rallies, large-scale sporting events, and war (all of which are today paraded before the camera), the mass sees itself face to face. This process, the consequences of which need no stressing, is very closely bound up with the development of reproductive and recording technology. As a rule, mass movements present themselves more clearly to the camera than to the eye. Cadres of hundreds of thousands are best captured in bird’s-eye view. And if that perspective is as accessible to the human eye as to the camera, the image that the human eye carries away from the scene is not amenable to the kind of enlargement that the recorded image undergoes. In other words, mass movements (and that includes war) represent a form of human behavior that particularly suits the camera.

