### III

*Within major historical periods, along with changes in the overall mode of being of the human collective, there are also changes in the manner of its sense perception*. The manner in which human sense perception is organized, the medium in which it occurs, is dictated not only naturally but also historically. The time of the migration of peoples, in which the late-Roman art industry and the Vienna *Genesis* came into being, had not only a different art from the Ancient World but also a different perception. The scholars of the Vienna School, Riegl and Wickhoff, who rebelled against the weight of the classical tradition beneath which the art of that period lay buried, were the first to hit on the idea of drawing from that tradition inferences regarding the organization of perception in the age when it enjoyed currency. Far-reaching though their findings were, they were limited by the fact that these researchers contented themselves with revealing the formal signature that characterized perception in the late-Roman period. They did not try (and possibly could not even aspire) to reveal the social upheavals that found expression in those changes of perception. So far as the present is concerned, conditions are more favorable to such an insight. And if changes in the medium of perception occurring in our own day may be understood as a fading of aura, the social conditions of that fading can be demonstrated.

Perhaps we should illustrate the term ‘aura’ as proposed above for historical objects by the concept of an ‘aura’ of natural objects. The latter we define as a unique manifestation of a remoteness, however close it may be. Lying back on a summer’s afternoon, gazing at a mountain range on the horizon or watching a branch as it casts its shadow over our reclining limbs, we speak of breathing in the aura of those mountains or that branch. It is not hard, given such a description, to see how much the current fading of aura depends upon social conditions. That fading has to do with two circumstances, both of which are connected with the increasing significance of the masses in present-day life. The fact is: *‘Getting closer to things’ in both spatial and human terms is every bit as passionate a concern of today’s masses*[^4] *as their tendency to surmount the uniqueness of each circumstance by seeing it in reproduction*. There is no denying that we see evidence every day of the need to apprehend objects in pictures (or rather in copies, in reproductions of pictures) from very close to. And there is no mistaking the difference between the reproduction (such as illustrated papers and weekly news round-ups hold in readiness) and the picture. Uniqueness and duration are as tightly intertwined in the latter as are transience and reiterability in the former. Stripping the object of its sheath, shattering the aura, bear witness to a kind of perception where ‘a sense of similarity in the world’ is so highly developed that, through reproduction, it even mines similarity from what only happens once. For instance, we are starting to see in the visual field what in the field of theory is emerging as the growing importance of statistics. The orientation of reality toward the masses and of the masses toward reality is a process of unbounded consequence not only for thought but also for the way we see things.



[^4]: Bringing oneself closer to the masses in human terms may mean: having one’s function in society removed from view. There is no guarantee that a present-day portraitist, painting a famous surgeon at breakfast or surrounded by his family, will capture the sitter’s function in society more accurately than a sixteenth-century painter portraying his doctors to the public as imposing presences – as Rembrandt, for example, does in *The Anatomy Lesson*.