### IV

The uniqueness of the work of art is identical with its embeddedness in the context of tradition. Tradition itself is of course something very much alive, something extraordinarily changeable. A classical statue of Venus, for example, occupied a different traditional context for the Greeks, who made of it an object of worship, than for medieval clerics, who saw it as a threatening idol. But what both were equally struck by was its singularity or, to use another word, its aura. The original way in which the work of art was embedded in the context of tradition was through worship. The oldest works of art, as we know, came into being in the service of some ritual – magical at first, then religious. Now it is crucially important that this auric mode of being of the work of art never becomes completely separated from its ritual function.[^5] To put it another way: *The ‘one-of-a-kind’ value of the ‘genuine’ work of art has its underpinnings in the ritual in which it had its original, initial utility value*. No matter how indirectly, this is still recognizable even in the most profane forms of the service of beauty as a secularized rite.[^6] The profane service of beauty that emerged with the Renaissance and remained significant for three hundred years thereafter did eventually, at the end of that time, following the first major upheaval to assail it, clearly reveal those foundations. What happened was: when, with the advent of the first truly revolutionary means of reproduction, namely photography (simultaneously with the dawn of Socialism), art felt a crisis approaching that after a further century became unmistakable, it reacted with the theory of ‘*l’art pour I’art*’ [‘art for art’s sake’], which constitutes a theology of art. From it there proceeded, in the further course of events, almost a negative theology in the form of the idea of a ‘pure’ art that rejected not only any kind of social function but also any prompting by an actual subject. (In poetry, Mallarmé was the first to reach this position.)

Paying proper attention to these circumstances is indispensable for a view of art that has to do with the work of art in an age when it can be reproduced by technological means. The reason is that they herald what is here the crucial insight: its being reproducible by technological means frees the work of art, for the first time in history, from its existence as a parasite upon ritual. The reproduced work of art is to an ever-increasing extent the reproduction of a work of art designed for reproducibility.[^7] From a photographic plate, for instance, many prints can be made; the question of the genuine print has no meaning. *However, the instant the criterion of genuineness in art production failed, the entire social function of art underwent an upheaval. Rather than being underpinned by ritual, it came to be underpinned by a different practice: politics*.



[^5]: The definition of aura as ‘a unique manifestation of a remoteness, no matter how near it may be’ represents nothing other than a formulation of the cultic value of the work of art in categories of spatial and temporal perception. Remoteness is the opposite of propinquity. The *essence* of remoteness is that it cannot be approached. Indeed, unapproachability is one of the chief qualities of the cultic image. By its very nature, it remains ‘remote no matter how near’. Any propinquity lent by its embodiment as matter does not impair the remoteness retained from its constituting a manifestation.
[^6]: The more the cultic value of the image is secularized, the less specific ideas of the substratum of its uniqueness become. To an ever-increasing extent, the uniqueness of the phenomenon inhabiting the cultic image is driven out by the empirical uniqueness of the artist or the artist’s creative achievement in the eye of the beholder. Never in its entirety, of course; the concept of genuineness never ceases to reach beyond that of authentic attribution. (This comes out with especial clarity in the person of the collector, who always has something of the slave to fetishism about him and through possessing the work of art partakes of its cultic power.) Nevertheless, the function of the concept of authenticity in the contemplation of art remains unambiguous: with the secularization of art, authenticity supplants cultic value.
[^7]: In connection with works of cinematography, the fact that the product can be reproduced by technological means is not (as with works of literature, for example, or painting) a condition of its mass circulation imposed from outside. *The technological reproducibility of films is rooted directly in the manner of their production. This not merely facilitates the mass circulation of films in the most direct way; it positively necessitates it*. It necessitates it because a film costs so much to produce that an individual who might be able to afford a painting, for instance, cannot afford the former. In 1927, someone worked out that a major film, if it was to pay for itself, had to reach an audience of nine million. With sound films, of course, things took a step backwards at first; the audience for ‘talkies’ was limited by language barriers, and this occurred at the same time as Fascism was laying such stress on national interests. However, more important than recording this setback (which in any case dubbing diminished) is considering its connection with Fascism. The fact that the two phenomena emerged at the same time has to do with the economic crisis. The same disturbances as, viewed on a grand scale, led to the attempt to preserve the existing conditions of ownership by means of open violence led the film capital threatened by the crisis to force the pace of preparations for the sound film. The introduction of sound films then, for a time, brought an easing of the situation. There were two reasons for this: sound films brought the masses back to the cinema, and they also created a fresh solidarity between new capital from the electrical industry and film capital. Looked at from outside, therefore, the sound film promoted national interests; but looked at from within it made film production even more international than before.

