### X

The actor’s alienation in front of the film camera, as Pirandello describes it, is inherently of the same sort as a person’s feeling of surprise and displeasure when confronted with his mirror-image. Now, however, the reflection can be separated from the person; it has become transportable. And where is it transported to? Before an audience.[^13] Awareness of this never leaves the screen actor, not for a moment. *The screen actor is conscious, all the while he is before the camera, that in the final analysis he is dealing with the audience: the audience of consumers who constitute the market*. That market, which he is entering not merely with his labor but with his very presence, his entire physical being, is quite as intangible, so far as he is concerned at the time of the performance aimed at it, as is any article produced in a factory. Surely that fact is going to heighten the sense of unease engendered by the new fear that, according to Pirandello, comes over the actor facing a film camera? Film’s response to the shriveling of aura is an artificial inflation of ‘personality’ outside the studio. The cult of stardom promoted by film capital preserves the magic of personality that for years has lain solely in the rancid magic of its commodity character. While film capital sets the tone, no other revolutionary service can be ascribed to present-day film in general than that of furthering a revolutionary critique of traditional notions of art. Certainly, in particular instances film today may go beyond that, furthering a revolutionary critique of social conditions, indeed of the property order. But that is no more the burden of the present investigation than it is the burden of film production in western Europe.

One concomitant of cinematographic technology, as of sporting technology, is that everyone watches the performances displayed as a semi-expert. If you have ever heard a group of newspaper boys, leaning on their bikes, discussing the results of a cycle race, you will have some understanding of this state of affairs. It is with good reason that newspaper publishers organize competitive events for their young delivery staff. These tournaments arouse great interest among participants, the reason being that the victor of such an event has the chance of rising from newspaper boy to racing cyclist. Similarly, the weekly newsreel, for example, gives everyone an opportunity to rise from passer-by to film extra. He may even, in this way, find himself transported into a work of art (think of Vertov’s *Three Songs about Lenin* or Ivens’s *Borinage*). *All persons today can stake a claim to being filmed*. That claim is best explained by a glance at the historical situation of current literature.

For centuries the situation in literature was such that a small number of writers faced many thousands of times that number of readers. Then, towards the end of the last century, there came a change. As the press grew in volume, making ever-increasing numbers of new political, religious, scientific, professional, and local organs available to its readership, larger and larger sections of that readership (gradually, at first) turned into writers. It began with the daily newspapers opening their ‘correspondence columns’ to such people, and it has now reached a point where few Europeans involved in the labor process could fail, basically, to find some opportunity or other to publish an experience at work, a complaint, a piece of reporting, or something similar. The distinction between writer and readership is thus in the process of losing its fundamental character. That distinction is becoming a functional one, assuming a different form from one case to the next. The reader is constantly ready to become a writer. As an expert, which for good or ill he must inevitably become in a highly specialized labor process (be it merely an expert in some minor matter), he gains access to authorship. In the Soviet Union, labor itself has a voice. And putting one’s job into words is part of the skill required to perform it. Literary authority is no longer grounded in specialist education but in polytechnic education; it has become common property.[^14]

All of which can easily be translated into terms of film, where shifts that in literature took centuries have occurred within a decade. For in film (particularly as practiced in Russia) this sort of shift has already, in places, been accomplished. Some of the actors encountered in Russian films are not actors in our sense but people who portray *themselves* (and do so primarily through their labor). In western Europe, capitalist exploitation of film bars modern man’s legitimate claim to be reproduced from being taken into consideration. Given the circumstances, the film industry has every interest in arousing the participation of the masses by means of illusory presentations and suggestive speculations.

[^13]: The altered mode of representation noted here as resulting from reproductive technology can also be seen in politics. Part of the crisis currently afflicting the bourgeois democracies is a crisis in the conditions influencing the representation of those who rule. The democracies place the ruler on display directly, in person, and they do it in front of MPs. Parliament is his audience! With innovations in recording equipment making the person speaking, while he is speaking, audible to and shortly afterwards visible to vast numbers, the stress is on how the politician conducts himself in front of that recording equipment. Parliaments are emptying at the same time as theaters. Radio and film are changing not only the function of the professional actor but equally the function of the person who, as rulers do, portrays himself before them. The direction of that change is the same (their different specialist tasks notwithstanding) for the screen actor as it is for the ruler. It seeks to display testable, indeed adoptable achievements in specific social conditions. This gives rise to a new kind of selection, a selection in front of the camera, from which the star and the dictator emerge as victors.
[^14]: The privileged character of the technologies concerned is disappearing. Aldous Huxley writes: Advances in technology have led [...] to vulgarity [...]. Process reproduction and the rotary press have made possible the indefinite multiplication of writing and pictures. Universal education and relatively high wages have created an enormous public who know how to read and can afford to buy reading and pictorial matter. A great industry has been called into existence in order to supply these commodities. Now, artistic talent is a very rare phenomenon; whence it follows [...] that, at every epoch and in all countries, most art has been bad. But the proportion of trash in the total artistic output is greater now than at any other period. That it must be so is a matter of simple arithmetic. The population of Western Europe has a little more than doubled during the last century. But the amount of reading – and seeing – matter has increased, I should imagine, at least twenty and possibly fifty or even a hundred times. If there were *n* men of talent in a population of *x* millions, there will presumably be 2*n* men of talent among 2*x* millions. The situation may be summed up thus. For every page of print and pictures published a century ago, twenty or perhaps even a hundred pages are published today. But for every man of talent then living, there are now only two men of talent. It may be of course that, thanks to universal education, many potential talents which in the past would have been still-born are now enabled to realize themselves. Let us assume, then, that there are now three or even four men of talent to every one of earlier times. It still remains true to say that the consumption of reading – and seeing – matter has far outstripped the natural production of gifted writers and draughtsmen. It is the same with hearing-matter. Prosperity, the gramophone and the radio have created an audience of hearers who consume an amount of hearing-matter that has increased out of all proportion to the increase of population and the consequent natural increase of talented musicians. It follows from all this that in all the arts the output of trash is both absolutely and relatively greater than it was in the past; and that it must remain greater for just so long as the world continues to consume the present inordinate quantities of reading-matter, seeing-matter and hearing-matter. (Aldous Huxley, *Beyond the Mexique Bay*). This is not of course a forward-looking view.

