### XI

A film, particularly a sound film, affords the kind of spectacle that was never before conceivable, not at any time nor in any place. It portrays an event that can no longer be assigned to a single standpoint from which things not strictly belonging to the performance process as such (camera, lighting equipment, crew, and so on) would not fall within the spectator’s field of view. (Unless, that is, the pupil of his eye shared the setting of the camera lens.) This fact, more than any other, renders any similarities that may exist between a scene in the film studio and a scene onstage superficial and quite unimportant. Live theatre is aware as a matter of principle of the point from which what is happening cannot simply be seen through as illusory. When, on the other hand, a film is being made, no such point exists. The illusory nature of film is a second-tier nature; it derives from editing. What this means is: *In the film studio the camera has penetrated so deeply into reality that the pure aspect of the latter, uncontaminated by the camera, emerges from a special procedure, namely being shot by a piece of photographic equipment specifically adapted for the purpose and then pasted together with other shots of the same kind*. The camera-free aspect of reality is here at its most artificial, and the sight of what is actually going on has become the blue flower [of Romanticism] in the land of technology.

The same state of affairs as here contrasts with that obtaining in the theatre can even more revealingly be compared to that which informs painting. In this case, the question we need to ask is: how does the cameraman relate to the painter? To answer it, perhaps I may be permitted an auxiliary construction based on the concept of the *Operateur* [the now-obsolete German term for the film-crew member Benjamin clearly has in mind] as we are familiar with it in connection with surgery. The surgeon constitutes one pole of an arrangement in which the other is occupied by the magician. The stance of the magician healing an invalid by laying-on of hands differs from that of the surgeon performing an operation on that invalid. The magician maintains the natural distance between himself and the patient; to be precise, he reduces it only slightly (by virtue of a laying-on of hands) while increasing it (by virtue of his authority) hugely. The surgeon does the opposite: he reduces the distance to the patient a great deal (by actually going inside him) and increases it only a little (through the care with which his hand moves among the latter’s organs). In short, unlike the magician (still a latent presence in the medical practitioner), the surgeon abstains at the crucial moment from facing his invalid person to person, invading him surgically instead.

Magician and surgeon behave like painter and cameraman. The painter, while working, observes a natural distance from the subject; the cameraman, on the other hand, penetrates deep into the subject’s tissue.[^15] The images they both come up with are enormously different. The painter’s is an entity, the cameraman’s chopped up into a large number of pieces, which find their way back together by following a new law. *That is why the filmic portrayal of reality is of such incomparably greater significance to people today, because it continues to provide the camera-free aspect of reality that they are entitled to demand of a work of art precisely by using the camera to penetrate that reality so thoroughly*.

[^15]: The audacities of the cameraman do indeed invite comparison with those of the surgical operator. In a catalogue of specifically gestural tricks of technique, Luc Durtain includes those ‘that surgery calls for in connection with certain difficult operations. To exemplify this, let me take a case from ENT surgery [...]; I am talking about the so-called endonasal perspective procedure; or let me refer to the acrobatic tricks that, guided by the reversed image in the laryngoscope, throat surgery is obliged to perform; I might also mention aural surgery, which is reminiscent of the precision work of the watchmaker. What elaborate sequences of the most delicate muscular acrobatics are not required of the man who would repair or rescue the human body? Just think of a cataract operation, where what almost amounts to a discussion goes on between the surgeon’s steel and tissue parts that are virtually fluid, or those momentous interventions in the abdominal cavity (laparotomy).’

