### XII

*The fact that the work of art can now be reproduced by technological means alters the relationship of the mass to art. From being very backward (faced with a Picasso, for instance), it has become extremely progressive (given Chaplin, for instance)*. Yet this progressive response is characterized by the fact that in it the pleasure of looking and experiencing is associated, directly and profoundly, with the stance of passing an expert judgment. This link is an important social indicator. In fact, the more the social significance of an art diminishes, the greater the extent (as is clearly turning out to be the case with painting) to which the critical and pleasure-seeking stances of the public diverge. The conventional is enjoyed without criticism, the truly new is criticized with aversion. In the cinema, the critical and pleasure-seeking stances of the audience coincide. And what crucially makes this happen is: nowhere more than in the cinema do the individual reactions that together make up the mass reaction of the audience prove from the outset to be caused by their immediately imminent massing. And in making themselves heard, they also check on one another.

Again, painting offers a useful comparison here. A painting always had an excellent claim to being looked at by one person or a small number. The kind of simultaneous viewing of paintings by large crowds that occurs in the nineteenth century is an early symptom of the crisis affecting painting, which was certainly not triggered by photography alone but, relatively independently of photography, by the work of art laying claim to mass attention.

The fact is, painting is not able to form the object of simultaneous reception by large numbers of people, as architecture has always been, as the epic once was, and as film is today. And despite the inherent impossibility of drawing conclusions from that fact regarding the social role of painting, the same fact nevertheless counts as a severe setback at a time when painting, as a result of special circumstances and to some extent in defiance of its nature, finds itself face to face with the masses. In the churches and monasteries of the Middle Ages and in the palaces of princes up until the late eighteenth century, joint reception of paintings occurred not simultaneously but often in stages, when it was handed down hierarchically. Where this happened otherwise, what comes out is the special conflict that befell painting as a result of the image becoming reproducible by technological means. But although an attempt was made to bring painting before the masses in galleries and salons, there was no way in which the masses could have organized and checked on themselves in the context of that kind of reception.[^16] As a result, the same audience as reacts in a progressive fashion to a grotesque film will inevitably, in the presence of Surrealism, become a backward one.

[^16]: This way of looking at things may seem crude; however, as that great theoretician Leonardo shows, there may be a time for consulting crude ways of looking at things. Leonardo compares painting and music like this: ‘Painting is superior to music because it need not die as soon as it has received life, as is the case with poor music [...]. Music, which vanishes the moment after it comes into being, is no match for painting, which with the use of varnish has become eternal.’

