### VIII

The artistic performance of the stage actor [i.e. what he or she *does* artistically] is presented to the audience by the actor in person; of that there is no doubt. The artistic performance of the screen actor, on the other hand, is presented to the audience via a piece of equipment, a film camera. The latter has two consequences. The apparatus that mediates the performance of the screen actor to the audience is not obliged to respect that performance as an entity. Guided by its operator, the camera comments on the performance continuously. The outcome of that running commentary, which the editor then assembles from material supplied, is the film as finally put together. It includes a certain number of movements that need to be recognized as those of the camera itself – not to mention such special settings as close-ups. The screen actor’s performance thus undergoes a series of optical tests. This is the first consequence of the state of affairs arising out of the fact that the screen actor’s performance is mediated by the camera. The second consequence is that the screen actor, by not presenting his performance to the audience in person, is deprived of the possibility open to the stage actor of adapting that performance to the audience as the show goes on; the cinema audience is being asked to examine and report without any personal contact with the performer intruding. *The audience empathizes with the performer only by empathizing with the camera. It thus assumes the camera’s stance: it tests*.[^11] This is not a stance from which cultic value can be judged.

[^11]: ‘Film [...] supplies (or might supply): practical conclusions regarding human actions in detail [...]. Any kind of character-based motivation is lacking, the inner life of the characters never furnishes the main cause and is rarely the main result of the action’ [Brecht]. The broadening of the field of what can be tested that the camera brings about in the screen actor matches the extraordinary broadening of the field of what can be tested that has come about for the individual as a result of economic circumstances. The importance of vocational-aptitude tests, for example, is growing all the time. Vocational-aptitude testing is concerned with isolated bits of the individual’s performance. Both filming and vocational-aptitude testing proceed before a body of experts. The director in a film studio occupies precisely the same position as the test conductor in a vocational-aptitude test.

