### IX

Film is very much less interested in having the actor portray another person to the audience than in having the actor portray himself to the camera. One of the first people to sense this transformation of the actor as a result of performance-as-test was Pirandello. It detracts only slightly from the comments he makes in this connection in his novel *Shoot* that they confine themselves to stressing the negative aspect of the matter. Even less that they relate to silent films. Because the sound film did nothing fundamental to alter things in this respect. The fact remains, the acting concerned is done for a piece of equipment – or, in the case of the sound film, for two. ‘The screen actor,’ Pirandello writes, ‘feels as if exiled. Exiled not only from the stage but from his own person. With dim disquiet he senses the inexplicable emptiness that results from his body becoming a withdrawal symptom, from its dissipating and being robbed of its reality, its life, its voice, and the sounds it makes by moving around, reduced to a mute image that flickers on the screen for an instant, then disappears into thin air [...]. The little projector will play with his shadow before the audience; and he himself must be content to act in front of the camera.’ That same state of affairs may be described as follows: for the first time (and it is film that has done this) a person is placed in the position, while operating with his whole being, of having to dispense with the aura that goes with it. For that aura is bound to his here and now; it has no replica. The aura surrounding Macbeth onstage cannot, for the live audience, be detached from the aura that surrounds the actor playing him. But what is peculiar about filming in the studio is that in the latter situation the audience is replaced by a piece of equipment. The aura surrounding the player must thus be lost – and with it, at the same time, the aura around the character played.

That it should be precisely a dramatist (Pirandello) who instinctively identifies the distinguishing characteristic of film as causing the crisis we see befalling the theatre comes as no surprise. A work of art captured entirely by technological reproduction, indeed (like film) proceeding from it, can have no more direct opposite than live theatre. Every more detailed examination confirms this. Expert observers long since acknowledged that in film ‘it happens almost invariably that the greatest effects are achieved when the least “acting” is done [...]. The ultimate development being [according to Arnheim, writing in 1932] to treat the actor as a prop that is selected for character and [...] put to use in the right place.’[^12] There is something else very closely bound up with this. *An actor working in the theatre enters into a part. Very often, the screen actor is not allowed to*. The latter’s performance is not a single entity; it consists of many individual performances. Along with such incidental considerations as studio hire, availability of partners, setting, and so on, basic mechanical requirements break the screen actor’s performance down into a series of episodes that can then be assembled. One thinks above all of lighting, installing which means that portrayal of a process that appears on the screen as a single rapid sequence of events must be captured in a series of individual shots that may, in the studio, extend over hours. Not to mention more palpable montages. A leap from a window may, in the studio, be filmed as a leap from scaffolding, while the subsequent flight may be filmed weeks later, during an outside shoot. Nor is it difficult to construe even more paradoxical instances. Possibly, following a knock at the door, an actor is asked to start in surprise. His reaction may turn out to be unsatisfactory. In which case the director may resort to arranging, one day when the actor happens to be back in the studio, for a gun to be fired behind him without warning. The shock registered by the actor at that moment may be captured and later edited into the film. Nothing shows more graphically that art has escaped from the realm of the ‘beautiful pretence’, which for so long was deemed the only habitat in which it might thrive.

[^12]: Certain ostensibly minor details by which the film director distances himself from what is done in the theatre assume added interest in this context. One is the experiment of having the actor play without make-up that, among others, Dreyer conducts in his *Joan of Arc*. He spent months finding the forty or so actors who form the court of inquisition. The search for these actors resembled one for props hard to get hold of. Dreyer went to enormous lengths to avoid similarities of age, build, and physiognomy. If the actor becomes a prop, the prop on the other hand not infrequently functions as an actor. Certainly, there is nothing unusual about film finding itself in the position of giving a prop a part. Rather than pick at random from an infinity of examples, let us cite just one that has particular probative value. A clock that is going will always simply be an irritant onstage. Its role (measuring time) can never be assigned to it in the theatre. Even in a naturalistic play, astronomical time would conflict with stage time. So it is most significant that film, on occasion, has no trouble using a clock to measure time. This, more clearly than many other features, indicates how, under certain circumstances, every single prop is capable of assuming crucial functions. From here it is but a step to Pudowkin’s assertion that ‘acting associated with and based upon an object will [...] always be among the most powerful methods of filmic creation’. This makes film the first artistic medium capable of demonstrating how matter acts along with man. Film can therefore constitute an outstanding tool of materialistic representation.

